What's the best box for you?
Before we go into what
what's happening right now?
Everyone has their favorite box.
I mean, I know as adults, we.
You've really gotten into adulthood.
When you get that box and you're like,
that's a really good box.
Anything that's easy to collapse, anything
that's easy
collapse is is one way,
you know, anything that's easy to open.
I like the zipper, the zippers.
Hello, and welcome to another episode
of the All Thoughts podcast.
I'm Tracy Alloway and I'm Joe Weisenthal.
Joe, I am going to put something
on the table and you tell me what it is.
Okay. Go on. All right, here I go.
Okay. Oh.
It is a, This is a
this is a corrugated, I believe, cardboard
box, that has a tape that says fragile.
And I would guess it's about,
I don't know, I'm not good at measurement.
Maybe 18in by
36in, something like that.
That is a very good physical description
of a cardboard box.
However, I'm going to say you're wrong.
It is, in fact,
a macro economic indicator.
The other acceptable answer is it's
part of the Atlas logo.
That's right, that's right.
It's a it's a box.
And that is core to Adelaide's.
But you know now we're going to talk about
literally when you think box
you don't often
first think magic money box puzzles.
And when you think box
you often don't necessarily
think of a container ship, which is often
called a box is in the book, the box.
But I think when people think about a box,
they think about a cardboard box,
corrugated or not.
Now is a very good time
to be thinking about boxes, by the way,
because there's been
some commentary about this,
but we've basically had a sort of box
Pocalypse.
Yeah, in the States,
are we still having one?
Jury's kind of out,
and we'll get into that in the discussion.
But US box shipments, so boxes of boxes,
which I find funny sort of box and,
anyway, US box shipments have fallen
to the lowest
second quarter reading since 2015.
That's according to the fiber box.
So so these are quite like,
probably like they're like folded up.
Yeah. Yeah.
So you have a bunch of them,
they're maybe wrapped in plastic
or something like that.
So shipments of those lowest
it's like 2015.
Yeah.
And I think there are some other numbers
we can get into
that are like the worst since
the financial crisis and things like that.
And obviously the concern is boxes tend to
contain products that people are buying.
Right.
So if no one's buying boxes,
what does that say about retail
spending, the health of the consumer
and the direction of the broader economy?
That's when you get into the macro
indicators stuff.
I you know, I love e-commerce,
but I hate breaking down box.
I know I hate it so much.
And then, you know, like rip it up
and there's no it's never quick.
I would like to see some innovation
on the ease of collapse ability.
You know what I did?
Because I buy a lot.
I train my dog to rip apart Amazon boxes.
Oh that's amazing.
But then you kind of went on strike
and stopped doing it.
Well, that would have been cool.
Get your kids to do it.
Yeah, put them to work.
Okay.
Well, I am happy to say we do, in fact,
have the perfect guest.
We're going to be speaking with Ryan Fox.
He is a containers and packaging analyst
for Bloomberg Intelligence.
So Ryan, thanks so much
for coming on our thoughts.
Thanks for having me.
It's so nice
to actually meet you in person
because we've been I being for a while
talking about boxes.
I don't know how this became
so interesting to me, but,
probably because of the decline
that we've been seeing.
Walk us through the numbers.
Like how bad is the actual fall
in boxes of boxes?
Shipments of boxes? Yes.
So when we think about box shipments,
they are shipped, like you said,
knocked down flat or CDF for sure.
CDF stands for oh knocked off right now.
Anything. I already learned something.
And so they're shipped
sometimes on pallets.
Sometimes they just stack them in.
But they're going to in the US,
end markets like food
manufacturers, beverage manufacturers,
people who make industrial products.
But about 50% of the boxes
that we consume in the US
are going to go through a grocery store.
So that's a really good way
to think about it, What we've seen
box shipments
have fallen in the first half, about 2.3%.
And this is largely due to uncertainties.
They're stemming from tariffs.
We saw a big ramp up during the during
the pandemic where box shipments grew.
The first year,
the pandemic by about 3.5%, actually
2.4%, then 3.5% the following year.
When we think about it in in concrete
terms,
we talk about box shipments
in terms of billions of square feet.
And when we talk about billions
of square feet, like 400,000,000,000ft²
would wrap around the Earth
like 30 times or something like that.
It's a very big. So what's great?
What exactly is being measured
here? Right.
So if you were to take this box here
and we were to tear it all apart, okay.
So by the way,
this is a regular slotted carton okay.
This is a double wall box.
What does it mean. It's not corrugated.
No. This is corrugated.
So let's let's take a little quick
parenthetical thought here.
So cardboard is actually not this.
This is a corrugated fiberboard box
for all you box nerds out there okay.
This particular one is a double office.
There's five layers.
The flat sheet is called liner.
The wavy part in
the middle is called medium.
Are you like in heaven right now?
I am so much in heaven right now.
You don't even know I talk about.
No, you don't have to wait.
So if we were
if we were to unfold this thing,
separate the glue seam
and lay it out flat,
and you just do basic math,
or you take your tape measure
and you go with the length. Right.
So that would measure it
in terms of square footage.
And this box right
here, it's been cut down
so it doesn't look as big as it really is.
But it's probably somewhere around
two 20ft².
We could measure it
if we wanted to, but we won't.
But if you were to do that
for every single box,
that's how they will measure it.
The, what's really kind of important is
these boxes are made on a variety
of different machines.
And one of the reasons
why it's called a corrugated box
is it's made on a corrugated.
And that's a machine that takes different
kinds of paper and it laminates together.
They stick together with typically
corn starch or some other starch product.
And so one of the mechanisms is called
the corrugated roll.
And it's a roll
with these little wrinkles in it.
They steam the paper
and it forms those little arches.
And that's what gives the board
its strength.
There are different sizes
of these little things like that in
they're called flutes,
but you can't play them.
They don't make any music.
Why does it so interesting? Yeah.
Super interesting.
Let's just keep talking about this
box. Why?
What is it about the corrugation process
that makes it stronger?
So from a physics standpoint, it's what
gives the box its shape and substance.
And there is a lot of science
that goes behind this.
In fact,
we now have ways to predict how the box
will perform in real world situations.
Just mathematically.
Do we do box testing where we do
beat up a box?
Absolutely. Yeah.
And so for a lot of companies,
they have to go through
the Ista
International Safe Transit Authority.
They actually test the box
to make sure it will hold up
against UPS or Fedex or in some instances,
they go so far
as to make sure that no matter
what happens, it's going to survive.
And those tests
can cost thousands of dollars.
So it's a very robust process.
What's the best box for before we go into
what what's happening right now?
Everyone has their favorite box.
I mean, I know as adults
we you've really gotten into adulthood
when you get that box and you're like,
that's a really good box.
Anything that's easy to collapse, anything
that's easy
collapse is is one way, no,
anything that's easy to open.
I like the zipper.
The zippers. Yeah.
A lot of people like the zipper pulls.
There
are some boxes that are very elaborate,
and they don't require much at all
to set them up.
They kind of fold
and lock in on themselves. Oh, yeah.
We call those die cut boxes.
They are made from a cutting die.
That looks like a big cookie cutter.
And they will make any shape
that you want to make,
The most popular style
is what we call a roll.
A roll end box.
And they can tuck on the inside.
They can tuck on the outside.
But this is really a nice box.
It's it's a box that you might see
if you were to buy something online.
And they're really trying to go for that
wow factor
because they're going to get for that to
open the box and show off the product.
Let's talk
more about this box on the table here.
Like, are you learned enough in the space?
You could say like, oh,
I think this came from x mil
or X year or like,
you have any other inside tip here.
Okay. So, this box doesn't have it, okay.
That I can see.
But on most boxes
that are made in the USA,
there is a small little stamp
on the bottom of the box.
It's round
and it's called a box maker's certificate.
Okay.
There are around 1100 facilities
in the U.S that make corrugated boxes,
and that little stamp on the bottom
will tell you what company made the box
and where it's located.
And more specifically, it will tell you
what the stuff is made of.
And in my kit.
Well, that's kind of a stupid detail,
but it goes back over 60 years, actually
goes back over 100 years to when boxes
were first starting to come around.
Most people don't know that corrugated
boxes are only 130 140 years old.
Only implemented in the
late 1890s I'm trying to think of before
this was a Joe.
What do you think? The first corrugated.
As if I would even begin to have a guess.
Anyway. Keep going.
So right after the
the the turn of the century, in the early
1900s, companies were looking for ways
to ship their product.
The only mechanism they had in that time,
we didn't really have 18 wheelers.
We had trains.
And so the rail companies,
as they were making new rails,
they're cutting down forests.
They had lots of wood
to do something with.
So what did they do?
They made crates, But crates were
very expensive and they were very heavy.
And so people
were looking for alternatives and
they came up with a corrugated box.
It actually goes back,
funny New York story.
The Dumbo area is home to,
the garage building and garage was one
of the early pioneers of paper packaging.
And he kind of discovered by accident
that you could
score paper
and and create these nice little boxes.
I will never look at Dumbo
the same way again.
Okay. Actually, that reminds me.
So who are the actual
big players in the paper industry?
Because I don't think I could name
a single one off the top of my head,
I can.
Oh, international paper
and what used to be Smurfit Stone.
Oh yeah. Smurfit. Okay. Yeah. That's good.
So you're exactly right.
International paper recently
got even bigger.
They acquired Dr.
Smith out of it was one named Crown.
Brown was also. Well,
they're still you know, this.
I actually in the brief time
when I was an equity analyst
over about 20 years ago,
I think I did a little research
into this space box analyst,
a fellow box, and.
All right, very brief devil.
And anyway, keep going. Yeah.
So, International Paper
recently bought Dr.
Smith. They got even bigger.
They were keeping pace with Smurfit
Kappa based out of
Dublin, Ireland,
who bought WestRock, who's here in the US.
They became kind of the first global
mega company.
IP followed suit.
So they're the two biggest in the US
and the biggest in the world.
Packaging Corporation of America is number
three in the US, followed
by Georgia-Pacific, Pratt Industries
and a variety of smaller independents.
Boxes come from trees, right.
Or come lumber comes from trees.
You know, we've talked about lumber
a lot on the show.
And one of the things that we learned,
you know, there's been consolidation
in the lumber space, but also particularly
after the great financial crisis,
there was a lot of reduction
in mill capacity.
Now that's related to housing
specifically, which was ground zero.
But what is the story of American
mill capacity over the last 20 years,
from prior to the great financial crisis
to the 20 tens to now, we really didn't
see a whole lot of new mill capacity
come along like 20 years ago.
But we did see it.
There was some investment there.
There were some new mills
that would come along.
I actually spent ten years
working in the corrugated
packaging industry
before coming to Bloomberg
and worked for one of those integrated
companies who has their own paper mills.
The mills that I worked for
were 100% recycled.
And so some of their investment,
would have shown up in that last 20 years.
They were actually
they've built many of the most recent
mills over the last 20 years.
But we really saw an
explosion of growth
right around the time of the pandemic.
So in 2023, 2.5 million
tons of new, 100% recycled
containerboard
making capacity came online.
And now containerboard is a technical
term.
It's the big term
for the paper that goes in these boxes.
So containerboard means liner board
and we're the medium.
So it's this big term.
So everyone's shipping flour for their
like sour dough or something
during the pandemic or buying new ovens
to remodel their houses while they can.
Just going back to the idea of the box
as a macroeconomic indicator.
I mean, I do see people talking about
like,
this idea of boxes as a leading indicator
every once in a while.
It is unconventional,
but some people do it.
How valuable are box shipments
or tracking the box
industry in terms of trying to figure out
what's going on with the consumer?
Very important for the consumer.
Like I said, about 50% of box consumption
is going to go through a grocery store.
So when you start to see box
shipments slip,
we probably need to be looking at
grocery stores and CPG companies,
to see what's going on there.
And we have seen a very
challenged consumer environment
over the last two years.
My personal opinion, I would say
we're in a consumer goods recession
because of what we've seen.
First half of 2025,
box shipments were down 12%
from the height of the pandemic.
That's a massive fall off.
So earlier
we talked about how we would measure
these things in billions of square feet.
Well, in 2021, we had 416,000,000,000ft².
The first half was right around
half of that.
So like about 208. Yeah.
It was really bad.
Quick math
with 190,000,000,000ft²
for the first half of 2025.
So pretty big fall off.
What's happening with prices
and so obviously right.
So measuring square feet is one thing.
What is happening with prices.
Well, the pricing
the pricing discussion is one that,
is sure full of controversy.
So what drives pricing is it
is it truly supply and demand?
Is it something that's more cost based?
For many, many years in the US,
it was supply demand based
where mill operating rates would hit
96%, inventories would get real low
and they would raise prices.
Or the opposite mill operators would go
below 90%,
inventories would rise
and prices would fall.
But over the last year
and a half, we've actually seen
none of those fundamentals hold up.
So mill operating rates
have barely been 90%.
Inventories hit five weeks
at the end of the first quarter.
And yet prices still went up.
Five weeks is a lot of it.
Five weeks is a lot of inventory.
Historical averages are around four weeks.
To to kind of set the
floor there three and a half weeks
gets a little dangerous.
When it's a little lighter than that.
We start worrying
about supply chain issues.
About half of the the containerboard,
is made at a paper mill
and shipped by rail to a box plant.
And rail isn't quite as fast and efficient
as an LTL,
or will actually be a full truckload.
But you can carry more rolls by rail
than you can by a truck.
So you kind of have to have a little bit
more of that time,
to allow for the transit for those roles.
What's your take on why paper companies
are actually increasing prices, even,
you know, when inventory seems to be high
and demand is going down.
Well, it's funny you ask that.
So four years ago,
I started trying to figure out
if we could read the tea leaves,
sort of say.
And, we put together a mix of inputs.
And having worked in the industry,
we kind of know how the sausage is made.
And what we did was
we put together this series of inputs
and we correlated it
back to historic movements.
And our algorithm explains
93% of the reasons why prices have moved
for Bloomberg
terminal class A box pricing algo.
Yeah.
So BK, BCI I index for people
who are on the terminal.
Yeah. Pull this up right I c keep going.
Well bk b
wait, what is it BCI yeah.
Do you see BCI stands for Bloomberg
corrugated box cost index.
And up until this year, when we did our
the last multiple regression analysis,
it had a 93% r-square.
So it was really good, right.
Well, pricing in the industry
diverted from our index this year
where prices went up
even though costs are going down.
And that's actually
not a complete anomaly.
We did see this in our index
a few years back in 2017, 2018.
But it wasn't quite as pronounced.
Oh, sorry.
Just to be clear,
because I want to get this right.
And the index that I'm looking at
is the box cost index.
So it's not so much that it's
measuring the cost of box like, so box
prices can go up even though this line on
the chart is rolling.
Correct. This is important. Yeah.
And some might call this,
kind of organic margin expansion.
Others have more colorful words for it.
But in the US, 90% of
the industry is vertically integrated.
And what that means is
they have their own paper mills.
They move that paper to their own box
plants and sell it to their own customers.
And so there really isn't much of an open
market the way there is in other regions.
In other regions, like in Europe,
they don't have that
vertical integration level.
So there is a much more robust
open market, and it drives
prices down because of normal supply
demand fundamentals.
If you do have just an absolute glut of
inventory, prices are going to fall.
Our best data says globally,
we have around 50 million
tons of oversupply of containerboard.
Now we don't have that just in the US.
That's a global number,
but that does kind of
alter your frame of consciousness.
Tricia, by the way,
this is just so fantastic.
Everyone should go to Bloomberg Terminal
because now I'm reading the PDF
that describes how the methodology,
the weights, by the way,
are the cost of diesel,
the cost of caustic soda, natural gas
price use, recycled fiber price, corn
price index, repair and maintenance,
average truck rate, U.S.
average hourly earnings.
And this is how they derive
the cost of what a box
and it looks are all the methodology.
It's really fantastic.
It's so funny
to think that corn is an input.
It's a 7% weight.
According to the methodology,
the biggest weight is the U.S.
recycled fiber price of 37%. Makes sense.
Just on the inventory.
See how much of the decline,
this year in terms of box
shipments is just an inventory glut.
Do we have like a good read on that
versus demand from a box standpoint?
We don't have a good read on that. Okay.
If we're thinking about the grocery store,
those boxes turn over very quickly.
Having worked in the industry, the box is
going to get made at the box plant.
It's going to go to a customer.
We're going to think like General Mills
and Kellogg's
and Hershey's and
all of the big brand names that we know.
It's not going to necessarily
sit in their facility for very long.
It will maybe get back into the system
within 30 days in fact,
I've been to the grocery store and my kids
hate it when we go to the grocery store.
I'm always turning over boxes
to see who made them, but
sometimes they will date stamp the boxes
as to when they were produced.
Oh, and I've seen as quick as 30 days
in the store.
And oftentimes when Smurfit Kappa
bought or bought WestRock,
I was able to see a brand
new Smurfit WestRock
BMC within 90 days of that transaction.
So it's just an interesting
little like tidbit.
And if you find yourself
turning boxes over from now on,
I'm going to start doing that.
How stable is the relationship
between square footage of boxes
and the actual goods sold in boxes?
And the reason I ask
this is that, you know,
I remember the first several times that
I ordered groceries, for example, online,
and I would get these deliveries.
I was like, this was really an efficiently
unpacked, like,
you get a box
and there's two tomatoes in there.
And it's like, was this really did
they really need to just have this?
Or Amazon is a classic example,
but I imagine the Amazon doesn't love this
either.
I imagine they're always trying
to optimize for a box capacity such that,
you know, you buy a new, remote control
for your Kindle Fire or whatever.
It doesn't come in a big box, do they?
Is there progress always being made
on the efficient use of the cubic footage?
Space within these boxes? Yes.
All right,
so let's talk about two things. First.
First, we're going to talk about
who the consumer is.
The second we'll talk about right sizing.
So first when we think about consumers
Walmarts targets
Amazon Home Depot, they are consumers.
And the majority of boxes
that are made are intended for them,
not for us.
In fact, that's why they call them big box
stores, right?
Right. So,
we can get into this later,
but this old box actually
has its own aftermarket,
in which probably 80% of the stuff
that we recover comes from those stores,
not from our doorsteps.
Okay.
So when we think about consumers,
we really need to think about the big
stores first, because that's
who the main consumers of these boxes are.
And so when you think about the changes
that we're seeing,
if we're seeing significant changes
at those stores,
we may be thinking about things
like Shrinkflation or companies altering
the size of their products
and then having to alter
the size of the boxes that hold them.
So I think while it's an important idea,
it's probably less
significant
than what we get at our homes and Amazon.
For instance, let's let's talk
about traditional e-commerce, or
I think I may start referring to this
as cart to cart and commerce.
Oh very good.
Yeah, that's good because e-commerce today
or digital sales is
some people talk about it
can can also include things
like Uber Eats or Instacart.
It could also include a buy online
pick up at the store.
So a cart to cart and commerce
might be a yeah, better, better way
to think about or like a you know,
maybe you can come up with a new term.
I'll I'll think about it.
So Amazon, from our best guesses
represents about 8% of all of the boxes
made in the US, at least in 2024.
And what we're seeing
from a lot of these companies who do that
kind of traditional e-commerce or the cart
to carton, we're seeing a right sizing.
So you may have gotten an Amazon box
that looks a little bit weird, right?
It's lightweight, real paper.
It's folded in on itself.
It's got that zipper pull on it,
and it just doesn't
quite look like this box on the table
that's been taped up.
And it's sort of a regular slotted carton.
You may have seen that,
or you may have gotten a paper mailer.
And Amazon is really been forging the way
in mailers and in packaging technology.
Wait, what's the paper mailer?
A paper mailer is a bag.
Oh, there's made from paper.
Oh, I've only ever gotten
the plastic ones of those from Amazon.
I don't think I've gotten.
Oh, wait, no, I probably have
with the bubble wrap inside,
some of them don't even have bubble
wrap anymore.
I haven't gotten one of those.
Okay, but this reminds me, if I am working
in the procurement department
of an Amazon or, I don't know, a Walmart
or someone like that, what are the factors
that go into me deciding what boxes
I actually want for the business?
That's
going to be a reflection
of what your product is,
and every product has its own
specification, what kind of box it needs.
So if you're making a widget,
you will determine how many of those
widgets are going to go into a box.
And that's going to be a function
of its weight and fragility.
And what kind of other internal packaging
you might need.
Let me ask this question
in a different way.
Why does Amazon,
at least historically, seem
to like big boxes?
Well, I don't know that I can answer
for Amazon on that one,
but it does seem to be
maybe at the discretion of people
who are packaging
at their packing stations
and what their available
inventory of boxes might be like.
I've,
I've seen some of these things in action.
It's a package.
It's just a small packaging,
desk of sorts,
with some overhead bins
that have knock down flat boxes in them.
This must be an interesting
sort of engineering problem,
because I might, at the end
consumer level, say, look at this
inefficient use of, box space.
I got a box
and all has a little remote control.
On the other hand,
maybe the optimization occurred
because the packer
has four boxes to choose from,
and if they had more choices, maybe
they could have had a more efficient,
space to, good ratio,
but then that would have taken up
more warehouse space
and made that whole process
less efficient.
So try all kinds of algorithms
that I'm not even thinking
about as the end consumer here.
There are lots of algorithms.
And when you think about boxes
and packaging in traditional e-commerce,
they are looking to optimize
not just from a packaging standpoint,
from like from a pricing position, but
really from a cube
in the shipments. Right?
So we have to think that Amazon
is going to process all these orders
or chewy or whatever
the e-commerce platform is.
They process the orders, they're going
to go through their distribution centers.
And if you're Amazon,
you have your own trucks.
You want to make sure that you can put
as many of those things
on a truck as possible.
There's all kinds of different points
at which the optimization could occur
for including packing the truck.
You know, when we're talking about broader
macroeconomic data
these days, in particular,
there are a lot of questions
about the degree to which the aggregates
are missing
part of the story, and specifically
in a lot of commerce these days, anytime
there's some retail CEO
that like things are holding up well,
but it's really being driven
by the high end.
The high end is keeping it afloat.
The middle consumer is getting squeezed,
lower income is getting squeezed.
You know, all kinds of things
are there different.
You know, we're talking in aggregate
when you
when you talk about box square footage
having been shipped.
But is there more granular data
that one could look at in
terms of the quality of cardboard, etc.,
that could tell us different things
about what's strong within the economy,
even if the big numbers are declining.
The fancy boxes,
the fancy box is not really there.
So one of the problems that our industry
faces is that we don't have great data.
Having worked in the industry
and having provided that data, it
it's a chore that no one really double
checks.
You've brought on a new customer, right?
And you're submitting all your paperwork
for the new customer.
One of those things
is a classification of their NAICs code.
The North American industry could well,
no one ever checks
to make sure that's proper, right?
You just kind of wing it you know,
look it up and see if they've maybe
filed it with the Secretary of Commerce
or something like that.
And and that's it.
So the the granular data is murky at best,
but it is insightful and it is consistent
because there is a cost
to changing your supplier.
Like we we do see it happen.
And for very big box customers
they don't like change.
And you have a long standing relationship
typically many, many years.
You have lots of SKUs.
And if you're a really big company
and you have operating
facilities all over the place,
you don't want to go through that.
So the data, while murky,
might be consistent.
And we do see some of those things,
like in 2024, for instance,
we saw that manufactured food
felt like by 3.7%.
So if you combine that with beverage,
it was a little over of a 4% decline
in box usage.
Now how do we describe that?
Did did those companies
see similar falls in their volume?
I think I think the data would suggest
that that's probably very close.
Corrugated
packaging does have some known trade offs.
One of those things is a returnable
plastic container.
That is mainly being pushed right now
towards produce.
Walmart specifically Sprouts
market, have been pushing
some of their people to adopt returnable
plastic containers as a viable option.
It reduces waste.
They're building supply chains around
these things to help carry them around.
So that is one of the things that we've
seen kind of cut into box consumption.
We don't know that it's a big thing yet,
but it is out there and it is a thing.
The other thing that we've seen
is a movement to larger format boxes, some
that are the size of a pallet, you know,
48in long, 40in wide and maybe 40in tall.
A great playhouse for your young kids.
I remember doing that with
huge boxes, turning them into houses.
Why would anyone invest in this space
currently?
Because when you describe
this enormous glut in supply
and then the fact that demand is going
down, maybe it's because of the tariffs.
Maybe if the U.S.
starts manufacturing more goods, it'll
domestically it'll start to pick up again.
But it seems like most of the lines
are kind of trending in the wrong way.
What what exactly is like
the allure of this industry?
That's a great question, and I wish
I knew the answer, other than they do
have dividends that they have been been
paying and and consistently paying.
So, so it's considered like a fairly
like stable state, very stable dividend.
I think it's a pretty safe investment.
We do see I mean, it's very popular from,
from a terminal standpoint, I get bluer
clients at retail all the time.
They're looking to figure out
if this is still a good investment.
And while we don't do buy, sell,
hold recommendations,
we still see a lot of traffic
in these in these lanes.
Does it just depend on
how big your company
actually is and how much pricing power
you have in the market?
Well, see, I think that's a myth.
I think
I think there really isn't pricing power.
If there were pricing power,
we wouldn't see some of the actions
that we're seeing in the world today.
And what I mean by that is there are some
mills that make a really robust paper.
It performs really, really well.
And there are scientific properties
to that paper
that set it apart from anything else.
And yet they aren't
getting the premium that
they should be getting
because there is an alternative.
And and it's
it's like wanting
a Ferrari and selling for a mustang.
They're both great, but one obviously has
the allure
and one has its client base too.
And when you can buy a mustang
and it works,
you're not always going to want to buy
that Ferrari.
Well, actually, this sort of gets me
to where I want to go.
First of all, what what would be the name
of the biggest box or packaging expo
in the United States like that?
Get it together somewhere?
Yeah.
In in big round terms
for packaging pack expo.
Where's that Vegas.
That's going to be in Vegas
this year. Maybe we'll go one day.
All right.
So setting aside the volume
and pricing trends
which we take for granted,
everyone is curious about
what would be the hot topics right now
that would be discussed at Pac Expo.
Ooh, sustainability
has been a really big topic
for a long time, and it's matched with
extended producer responsibility laws.
So this is a state
by state initiative to basically shift
the burden of recycling away
from its residents and onto the companies
who are creating the waste.
How does that work exactly?
So right now, we have a handful of states
who've actually passed legislation.
Oregon's the first one
that that is really kind of enacting this,
and they've set up a fee schedule.
They've measured how much waste their
state produces in a month or in a year,
and they've allocated
a certain number of dollars
per pound or cents per
pound for each one of those commodities.
And if you're selling something
into the state, they are essentially
placing a fee on the waste
that you're sending in their state.
And you have to pay a check to them.
Mike, can you talk a little bit more
about the economics of recycling?
Because I put
a lot of the cardboard I
used into the problem, into the proper
bin, the economics, the recycling.
Like, yeah, but like I'm always in
this goes with any recycling really,
which is that when I think about the labor
that actually when I think about a,
the degree of diligence
that people and I would say,
and probably higher than average diligence
about been, proper been allocation.
But I know I'm not perfect, but
when I think about the degree of diligence
and the inefficiency
and then the labor and all of this stuff
and then talk to a guy, what?
When is it, actually economical
and when is it just sort of some sort
of cargo cult type, behavior that people
engage in where there's no real purpose?
Well, so most, most of the time
the recycling fees are paid by taxes.
My street, for instance,
that was not the case.
And I had to pay $25 a quarter for a bin.
Not not terrible, but I had to pay for it.
The economics in big round numbers
work like this.
It costs anywhere from about $400
a ton upwards to $700 a ton to go out
and do the collections and processing for
recovered materials, all of that stuff.
So you'll see a a truck
come and pick up your recyclables.
It goes to a facility called a Murph,
a municipal recovery facility.
And there it's process.
And they have lots of lines
that sort things out
plastics and metals and papers
and all that stuff.
And then they produce bales.
So a a compact
cube of sorts of these materials,
and then they get sold.
So if we were to
just use a big round number
and say $500 a ton, the net ton that comes
out of the Murph only has a street value
between 100 to $140 a ton.
Very little getting that right.
That's just terrible.
That's terrible.
And the craziest thing is
the corrugated box.
Yeah.
Is what really makes household
recycling even work.
Because, we know from from data.
And this is something which I challenged
several years ago, our best data says
that we recycle about 66% of
of the corrugated boxes in the U.S.
it's a pretty good number.
The industry used to say
93% of boxes got recycled.
There's no way that's possible.
But we don't have the data
to say it's lower than 66%.
But we do have a methodology that we use
to kind of get their
it was actually supported
by the National Renewable Energy Lab.
Now you can probably shoot some holes
in some of their stuff too.
But big point is we know that about 60
some percent of these get recycled.
And we know they have a very robust
aftermarket.
We process about 35 million
tons of old corrugated cartons
almost every year.
About a third of them
are going to go overseas.
There are a lot of other countries
that want the virgin fiber that we produce
here.
Now that we've revealed
the depressing truth about recycling,
let me ask a slightly
more positive question, which is
have there been any cool technological
developments when it comes to box making?
They are constantly patenting boxes,
making new equipment to make them faster.
Improving the the way we make the paper,
we're trying to make stronger paper
that's lighter and weight.
So if you think about some of these, we'll
go back to the EPR laws for a second.
Those fees are based on the weight
of what you're consuming.
So if the companies can buy a lighter
weight material then their fees go down.
Right.
So there is a push now
to see if we can lightweight the paper,
make it as strong but with less weight.
And so these are things that we're going
to see really take some
some shape in the next 5 to 10 years.
You know I'm glad you mentioned export.
One of the things that I've noticed
whenever I am, traveling abroad,
even to fairly rich countries,
but I definitely notice it
when I'm in poorer countries,
is that the quality of packaging materials
is distinctly worse than here.
So and I
the the example that I often notice
is, you know, you buy a bottle of water
in a U.S grocery store.
It's nice, it's sturdy,
it holds its, form very well.
You buy a bottle of water
at a grocery store in Guatemala
where I was a couple of years ago
from Mexico. It's crinkly.
It smashes over easily.
You could tell that it's a less durable,
plastic.
If we were to look at the cardboard boxes
running through a developing economies
such as, Guatemala, etc.,
we see that this is noticeably different
than the quality of cardboard
that we're seeing here.
The technical term is going to be furnish.
Okay.
So what are you using to make the boxes?
The US has historically been a maker
of virgin craft liner board, meaning
they cut down trees.
They chipped the trees.
They they turn those chips
in into new virgin paper
that's actually been declining
and reversing.
We've seen more and more recycled capacity
come online.
And because we've still had a very good
virgin base,
the recycled paper here in the US
has been very good.
Now in other countries
they may not have southern yellow pine,
so they are buying rock
or they're using their own
oak or oaks, old corrugated cartons.
So they're they're just
going to rip up the stuff that they have.
If they start with a low quality box,
then they're going to get a low quality
paper on the back end and less
so sometimes they are going to have
a lower grade paper.
And in other areas of the world
they actually have different definitions
for that kind of paper.
So they would have different grades of it.
And so yeah, you
sometimes you get the low grade paper
because it's a commodity
and then it'll work.
So I just have one more question.
Just to wrap it all up.
That's a packaging joke.
Packaging joke. Okay.
Wrapping it all up, summarizing
what's your,
prediction for the second half of the year
in terms of box shipments?
We think they're still
going to be very challenged.
Full year, we're saying
there's probably going to be down
2.5%, maybe as high as 3%.
It really depends on what happens.
A lot of this is stemming from tariffs
and policy coming out of the,
the white House.
So it really depends on
how much confidence
some of these companies have as they look
forward.
We've seen the the number of containers
coming into the U.S, like the cargo ships
was front loaded.
Right.
And then and now that the tariffs
are kind of here or maybe they're not here
and they've been kind of
tapering off a bit,
it will be very curious
to see what happens.
But to to maybe think about it
another way.
You know, most Americans buy stuff
when they have money
and when they don't have money,
they put it on credit cards.
And we're seeing records,
amount of credit card debt.
And that's not a great sign
for if people are going to spend money.
So we don't really think that that's
a really hot outlook
for even the for the holidays.
Or Americans can spend money probably.
Is it going to look exactly like it did
in prior years?
Probably not.
All right.
Ryan Fox containers and packaging analyst
at Bloomberg Intelligence,
thank you so much. Thanks for having me.
You know, one thing
I really like about, Ryan and people like
that is when they trot out
all the numbers off the top of their head.
Yeah, that was really impressive.
That was no notes.
And he had answers
for pretty much everything.
I wouldn't if someone had asked me
how I thought they would measure
box shipments, I might have guessed,
you know, cubic feet, red square feet.
But yes, I, I wouldn't have, you know,
all this covering the world stuff.
Yeah. It's pretty cool. Yeah.
And I guess the question over,
how useful a macroeconomic indicator
boxes actually are,
it still kind of lingers because we did
have retail sales data,
for the past two months that are available
that came in, like, pretty resilient,
pretty strong.
Despite the decline in box shipments.
I what was the term huge
cart to carton commerce?
I really like that
because it's true. Right.
What is e-commerce that now encompasses
so many different things.
So there is
this sort of classic e-commerce
where you go on a website,
you buy a thing and it comes in a box.
But then there's of course, you know, buy
and you pick up at the store
and that's a slightly different variation.
Or maybe you get, food
delivered in a cardboard box, etc..
So I like the idea of,
okay, e-commerce is so broad
that if we want to have like
for like trajectories of some of these
use cases for cardboard boxes, we have to
maybe get a little bit more granular.
Well, that reminds me, actually,
I think one thing that's still really
underappreciated about the packaging
industry is how much it feeds into broader
inflation.
Yes, yes.
And this is something I remember
some economists bringing this up,
during the post pandemic era.
But the interesting thing is now,
even though box shipments are going down,
prices still seem to be kind of sticky
and even going up.
So what does that mean for inflation?
I like to think when you buy,
I always think about this and sometimes
it maybe gets a little metaphysical, but
when you buy a thing in a grocery store,
let's say you buy an avocado or you buy,
what?
Like what are you buying
when you buy the avocado? Right.
Because, okay, there is the physical
avocado that you might cut open,
but then you're buying the time
it spent in a refrigerated space.
You're paying rent to those, owners
of refrigeration, transportation.
You're buying the transportation, etc.
it's interesting to think about any good
that you buy, period
ahead of lettuce, etc..
How little is the lettuce? Whatever.
Even the lettuce means,
because there is labor
that went into the planting of the lettuce
and there is the land of the lettuce, etc.
so the idea of what are you buying
when you're buying something?
Often that include the packaging, but
often it's just never really clear at all
what it is
except this bundle of goods and services.
I'm buying an entire slice of the economy.
You literally are okay,
now that we've gotten into
a metaphysical discussion about boxes,
shall we leave it
there? Let's leave it there.
All right.
This has been another episode
of the All Thoughts podcast.
I'm Tracy Alloway.
You can follow me at Tracy Alloway
and I'm Joe Weisenthal.
You can follow me at The stalwart.
And if you enjoyed this conversation
then please
like better yet, subscribe
or leave a comment.
Thanks for watching.
To. Me.